Design

My bacteria simulator aims to simulate population dynamics at
a very basic level using only three different kinds of species, each
with different qualities. The simulation plots the populations
of all the species and displays all the data values in a panel.

In this simulator, I model a similar flash based game called
Bacteria Simulator. I used many concepts from this simulation in my own.
Things that I liked from the design were the way that grass had different 
transparencies of green to denote their energy level; I also thought the 
graph was very helpful. Something I would have liked to have seen from 
this model that I have included in my own is some sort of evolution mechanic,
which I have implemented with mutations of speed and vision. I also displayed 
average speeds and visions to give the user a better idea of what is going 
on in terms of evolution.

The structure of the program consists of a Simulation class that
handles the pygame mainloop and mouse and key events. The PetriDish
class handles the implementation of the simulation itself.
There are also DataPanel and ControlPanel classes, which are modules 
that display data and control functions, respectively. All of the properties 
of the bacteria are contained within their respective classes (Herbivore, 
Predator, and Omnivore), which are all subclasses of the Bacterium class. 
Grass is a separate class, where each instance of Grass is a separate cell 
of the grid. Graphing is done by the Graph class.

The layout of the program consists of three distinct sections: the petri dish, where
all the bacteria events occur; the control panel, where the user interacts
with the program; and the data panel, where all the data is displayed. This
separation of function allowed for great clarity both in the user interface
and in the code itself (where each of these components has its own class).

All the bacteria and grass are sprites that are contained in groups. These
groups (implemented by pygame) efficiently handle collision events to where
there can be hundreds of interactions to check for at a given moment. The
variables of each bacterium are decayRate, energyOfDivision, radiusOfVision,
speed, and chaseSpeed. Balancing these variables was done by trial and
error and fitting the population curves to classic population graphs that one
would find in a biology textbook. The petri dish of grass is a 2d list of
Grass objects. The graph is created by making a list of all
the data points and connecting all the points with lines. Scrolling is
achieved by popping the data values from the front of the list once the list
reaches a maximum length. 

